An Unfortunate State Of Affairs 
Hilary Greaves, Faculty of Philosophy, University of Oxford 
Ashley Madison is an online extramarital dating service, running with the succinct subtitle “Life is 
short. Have an affair.” On July 20, 2015, the service announced that hackers had breached its data 
security defences, and obtained identifying details for the site’s 37 million members. In the months 
that have since past, the newspapers have reported case after case of divorce, resignation from top 
jobs, blackmail and, tragically, suicide.1 
Reactions to the Ashley Madison scandal have been many and various, ranging from unreserved 
sympathy for the ‘victims’ to the view that subscribers to Ashley Madison were stupid and 
‘therefore’ deserve everything they get. My own reaction to any case of family trauma caused by 
infidelity is rather one of sadness: the sadness of witnessing suffering that seems, in many or most 
cases, so eminently avoidable. 
I do not mean that the suffering would have been avoided if the straying parties had kept strictly to 
their vows of monogamy, true though that may be. What strikes me most is rather the frequency of 
the refrain that what really hurt the wronged partner was “not the sex, but the betrayal of trust”. 
This raises the urgent question of why the vows of monogamy were made in the first place. Of 
course, once a promise is made, (a) it should be kept and (b) one feels cheated, even humiliated, if 
one is on the receiving end of a promise-breaking; but those observations imply nothing about which 
promises are good ones to make. If one’s partner really, really likes strawberries, to the point at 
which he or she would find them a source of great temptation if they became forbidden fruit, it 
would be a bad idea to make one’s relationship conditional on an oath of strawberry-abstinence, 
and then to be torn apart by the betrayal of trust when said oath is inevitably broken. The advocate 
of monogamy should take a long, hard look at whether the arguments for insisting on sexual 
abstinence are any stronger than the arguments for insisting on strawberry abstinence. 
Sexual exclusivity is not the only way.  In a relationship in which, for example, it is understood that 
this is one’s primary relationship for the foreseeable future but that either or both partners may 
legitimately desire and have sexual relations with others, there is no reason to feel ‘cheated’ if 
indeed such additional sexual relations occur. In another model, successfully adhered to by a 
significant minority, a household might consist of multiple men and multiple women, where each 
household member has relationships with two or more other household members, on equal 
footings, and children might have any biologically possible combination of parents. Far from being a 
hell of intrigue and suspicion, if asked to describe the nature of their relationships to outsiders, 
people actually in such polyamorous relationships tend to place more emphasis on honesty, open 
communication and trust than those in monogamous relationships. Polyamory is not for everyone, 
but its existence does lend additional credence to the idea that it is trust that is really the key to a 
relationship, rather than sexual exclusivity per se.  
Some advocates of monogamy think that no such alternative arrangement could be stable. 
Husbands and wives of many years, they worry, would be torn apart by the ever-shifting process of 
1 http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3208907/The-Ashley-Madison-suicide-Texas-police-chief-takes-life-
just-days-email-leaked-cheating-website-hack.html; http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3227253/Pastor-
seminary-teacher-outed-member-Ashley-Madison-commits-suicide-carried-shame.html 
                                                           
following their sexual inclinations and romantic whims; the value of long-term shared experience 
and commitment would be pushed into the background, and we would all end up alone and 
isolated. But experience belies these claims; and, for better or worse, neither does the data on 
divorce rates in supposedly monogamous societies support the claim that a system of monogamy is 
any more conducive to long-term stability. 
It is also instructive to recall that most of us succumb to an urge towards exclusivity in the domain of 
friendship when we are children. In my primary school and early high school years, all but the most 
unfortunate girls in the class had a ‘best friend’. Any excessive degree of favouritism towards 
another – say, giggling and whispering with a girl who was not one’s current best friend and refusing 
to share the secret with the chosen one – was a serious business, and the occasional actual 
rearrangement of the best-friend partnerships were matters of minor trauma. We have since grown 
out of this infantile insistence in the case of friendships, and we would have no truck with arguments 
that this was a mistake. The advocate of monogamy should take a long, hard look at whether the 
arguments for insisting on exclusivity of sexual relationships are any stronger than the arguments for 
insisting on exclusivity of friendships.  
Some advocates of monogamy insist that once in a committed relationship, one should not desire 
sexual relations with anybody else. In the ideal case, they say, one’s chosen partner is the ultimate 
focus of one’s desire and provides for all one’s needs and tastes, so there is no need to look 
elsewhere. This is not a particularly convincing claim (again, it seems no more plausible than the 
analogous and highly dubious claim regarding friendship), but even if true, it is irrelevant. Our 
question is what the norms of relationships should be given the tendencies and desires that we 
actually have, not which tendencies or desires we ‘should’ have, a matter that is anyway largely 
beyond our control. 
The monogamy-monger’s final argument is usually an appeal to some sort of biological necessity: as 
irrational as it may be, they say, humans are just biologically hard-wired to feel anxiety and jealousy 
if a sexual partner also has other sexual partners. Those who try to escape the mould of monogamy, 
according to this final argument, are attempting to fly in the face of their biological destiny, and are 
doomed to failure. 
The core ‘hard-wiring’ claim in this argument may or may not be true, as a matter of biology. 
Certainly, it is easy to think of evolutionary-style explanations of why it might be true: evolutionary 
ancestors who fought off or even killed their sexual rivals were, perhaps, more likely to pass on their 
genes than would-be ancestors who did not. (Equally certainly, there are some thoroughly non-
monogamous species, and they evolved too; but let that pass.) Even if the ‘hard-wiring’ claim is 
accepted, though, it does not follow that we should institute a rule of monogamy in our 
relationships. For, first, the fact that some tendency is inbuilt does not mean that we cannot 
overcome it: it does not mean that we have to actually feel jealousy. We probably all have some 
inbuilt tendency to seek out fatty foods, but that does not mean that one cannot get oneself, 
through habituation and reflection, into a state in which one’s reactions to such foods are ones of 
indifference or even repulsion. And, second, the fact, if it does remain a fact, that one feels some 
jealousy, does not mean that one has to bow to it, instead of dismissing it as an irrationality, a 
defect. Many of the factors that might once have made monogamy adaptive are anyway no longer 
applicable in the modern world: contraception can largely prevent the creation of undesired 
offspring from extra-pair copulations, and DNA testing can establish paternity in case this is in doubt. 
We may balk at allowing such an outdated evolutionary inheritance to keep us prisoner. 
The users of Ashley Madison were acting on the basis of urges they could not help feeling, desires 
they could not help having. In some distant possible world, all relationships permit open 
acknowledgement of the participants’ desires, and permit, nay encourage, explorations of harmless 
opportunities for the enrichment of life. In that world, the Ashley Madison hackers have no power to 
cause even a sleepless night. 
