ACT Broome and others have argued that it makes no sense, or be true, to say that it is better for a given person that he or she exist th can be understood to suggest that, likewise, it makes no sense, or at least to say that it is worse for a given person that he or she exist than that
existed at all.
This argument is of critical importance to the question of whether consequentialist theory
should take a traditional, aggregative form or a less conventional, person-affecting, or person based, form. I believe that, potentially, the argument represents a far more serious threat to the person-based approach than does, for example, Parfit's two medical programmes example. Parfit's example nicely illustrates the distinction between aggregative and person-based ap proaches and raises important questions. But the example — though not, I think, by Parfit — is sometimes pressed into service as a full-fledged counterexample against the person-based approach. As such, I argue, the example is not persuasive. In contrast, the Broomeian argument, if correct, is definitive. For that argument relies on certain metaphysical assump tions and various uncontroversial normative claims — and hence nicely avoids putting into
play the controversial normative claims that lie at the very heart of the debate.
The purpose of the present paper, then, is to evaluate the Broomeian argument. I argue that
this potentially definitive challenge to a person-based approach does not in fact succeed.
1. Introduction
It is plausible to suppose that in rare cases a person's existence may of necessity — perhaps as a result of an untreatable, unmitigatable genetic disease or disorder — involve so much anguish and so little of what makes life worth living that we will want to say that the choice to bring that person into existence to begin with was morally impermissible, or wrong [1], An issue that arises is whether such a choice is wrong in virtue of the fact that it wrongs the anguished person. It is awkward and implausible to say that the choice wrongs the person in the case in which the person's lot could not somehow have been improved — in the case, that is, in which agents could not have made things better for the person than they in fact are. But if the person lives in anguish as a matter of necessity, then the only alternative to the person's living in anguish is for the person never to have been brought into existence at all. But can that alternative really ever be one that constitutes an improvement in one's lot? Can it really ever have been better for an existing person that that person never have existed at all?
© Society for Applied Philosophy, 2003, Blackwell Publishing, 9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK and 350 Main Street, Maiden, MA 02148, USA.
This content downloaded from 216.165.95.161 on Tue, 03 Apr 2018 21:47:27 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms
 160 Melinda A. Roberts
The traditional, impersonal, aggregative form of consequentialism — wh aggregative consequentialism, or AC — will not have any particular need t question. According to AC, whether a given choice is morally permiss depend on whether some person or another has been wronged. If an altern would have created additional good, or wellbeing, on an aggregate basi capable of deeming the one choice impermissible even if it wrongs no
In contrast, a nonaggregative, or "person-affecting," form of conseq which I will call person-based consequentialism, or PBC — considers the perm a given choice to depend critically on whether that choice wrongs som another [3]. Moreover, the person-based approach can be understood to as AC does, stringent maximizing elements. Indeed, a centerpiece of P principle that, for each person, agents must, with exceptions, do the best t that is, create the most wellbeing that they can, for that person. Of course
this principle must be made, and other principles introduced, to addr situations in which one person's wellbeing can be increased only by decreasi Nonetheless, the upshot is that PBC accepts that whether a person has bee depends on whether that person's lot could somehow have been impr was nothing that agents could have done to make things better for a wellbeing for that person has been maximized — then that person has not b Applied to the case of the person whose options are limited to an angu none at all, this idea means that that person — the anguished person — ha wronged unless it is also true that the "none at all" option would have for that person. For if that is not the case, then wellbeing has been m the anguished person. Thus the question of whether it can ever have been
an existing person that that person never have existed at all attains under PBC.
Suppose it is true, then, that it cannot ever have been better for a person that t person never have existed at all. In those admittedly rare cases in which no on suffers or can be said to have been wronged as a consequence of the anguished
person's having been brought into existence, PBC implies that the choice to bring the
anguished person into existence is morally permissible — that is, is as good as any other choice, and not wrong at all [4]. But this is an unacceptable result. If PBC in fact has that result, then we probably should all of us become aggregationists [5].
The issue of whether never having existed at all can ever be better than existence will thus be the focus of the present paper. My conclusion will be that it is plausible to think that never having existed at all can indeed sometimes constitute the better alternative. Thus, the much larger issue of whether normative theory should take an impersonal and aggregative form or a person-based and nonaggregative form will have to be decided on some distinct basis.
I begin the discussion in part 2 below with one of Parfit's most provocati "nonidentity" cases. As part 2 makes plain, PBC does not manage to avoid what consider a troubling result — that it is indeed permissible to bring into existe a person whose life as a matter of necessity will be flawed, though not anguished, identifiable ways. I argue, however, that it is not correct to accept that case as a b fide counterexample to PBC. That assessment of the original case gains force, I bel when we compare, in part 3, the original case to a revised case in which the choice made to bring into existence a person whose life will be not merely flawed but ra
© Society for Applied Philosophy, 2003
This content downloaded from 216.165.95.161 on Tue, 03 Apr 2018 21:47:27 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 Can it Ever Be Better Never to Have Existed? 161
anguished. If PBC does indeed imply that it is morally permissible to bring in ence the anguished person regardless of the depth of the anguish that person w then PBC must be rejected. Thus the revised case, in contrast to the original, w potentially, represent a bona fide counterexample to PBC.
Part 4 details how and when PBC relies on the idea that it can sometimes be better
never to have existed at all. Just how critical that idea is for PBC is made clear by introduction of a new version of Parfit's "repugnant conclusion" case. That n sion of the case, unlike Parfit's, takes aim at the person-based rather than the aggr approach [6]. What it shows is that — if indeed it cannot ever have been better n to have existed at all — PBC is forced to condone the choice of an alternative in which
vast armies of persons have anguished lives, lives far less than any worth living preference to some other alternative that contains a distinct, large and wellbeing-ric population.
It is also noted in part 4 that, just as PBC relies on the idea that it can sometimes better never to have existed at all, so does the legal claim of wrongful life. Such clai are brought by or on behalf of a child against those medical professionals whose negligence has ultimately resulted in that child's anguished existence. However, since the specific negligence claimed gives rise, not to the genetic or chromosomal defect, b rather to the child's existence, and given the general suspicion whether it really can ev be better never to have existed at all, claims for wrongful life have generally not be recognized by courts in the United States. The issue, then, of whether it can eve be better never to have existed at all has not just normative but legal implications
as well.
Much depends, then, on the idea that it can be better never to have existed at all.
But this idea has been challenged. An argument against it, which I will call the attribution argument, is introduced in part 5. Roughly, according to the attribution argument, it cannot ever be correct to say that never existing at all is better since saying that attributes a property to a never-existing person, and never-existing persons cannot have properties. The heart of my reply is that the claim at issue can be construed as a claim about an existing person, and not about a never-existing person. Along the way,
a distinct issue regarding reference is also addressed. Conclusions are stated in part 6.
A few terminological points and a brief statement of some of the basic principles
of PBC are in order. A given possible world, or future, is accessible to agents, or an alternative for agents, at a time if that future is one that agents, acting either as individuals or in concert with existing or future agents, have at that time the practical capability to effect. Thus, a future at which a philanthropist donates money to a researcher who uses that money to make genetic therapy for Huntington's disease a reality in two years may be one that is accessible to, or an alternative for, the philan thropist and the donor now. In contrast, a future at which a person who in fact suffers from Huntington's disease is this afternoon completely cured is a future that is not now accessible to, or an alternative for, agents. It is important that the accessibility notion not be construed too narrowly. Thus, the fact that agents in many instances would decline to take steps to cause a given future to obtain — that they would decline to offer expensive gene therapy to a given person at such time as that therapy becomes a reality — does not imply that that future is not an alternative. It is, rather, an alternative, accessible future that agents have simply chosen not to effect. Nor does the fact that a given future is improbable imply that that future is not an alternative. In point of fact,
Society for Applied Philosophy, 2003
This content downloaded from 216.165.95.161 on Tue, 03 Apr 2018 21:47:27 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 162 MelincLa A. Roberts
at the moment of choice, the effecting by agents of any particular future — specificity — is highly, highly improbable. Some futures are, nonetheless, alt
Person-based consequentialism, or PBC, depends on the idea that comparisons can
be made between the specific level of wellbeing that a given person has at a given alternative and the level of wellbeing that that person has at other alternatives. At certain points, it is also assumed that interpersonal comparisons of levels of wellbeing at the same and at distinct alternatives can be made. Thus, where X and Y are
alternatives and p and q are persons, AC employs the two-place relation, "X contains more aggregate wellbeing than Y," whereas PBC employs the distinct four-place rela tion, "p has more wellbeing in X than q has in Y."
References to levels of wellbeing are understood to be references to overall, lifetime levels of wellbeing. Some rudimentary assumptions are introduced about wellbeing in part 4 below. However, for purposes of the present paper, it is not necessary to define "wellbeing" or to decide whether wellbeing consists of pleasure, happiness, preference-satisfaction, resources, the capability to achieve functionings or something else entirely [7].
Thus, according to PBC, for each person p at a given alternative X, agents at X must, with exceptions to address tradeoffs, do the best that they can, that is, create the most wellbeing that they can, for p. It is important to clarify two points. First, "each person p at X" sweeps in, not only existing persons but also future persons — those who do not now, but will, exist at X. This is an important point in view of the fact that other so-called "person-affecting" approaches take a far narrower view, excluding those, for example, whose future existence is not "inevitable" [8], In addition, it is not intended that the term "person" be limited to the biologically human. While I do not attempt to define that term here, I do note that it seems plausible that orangoutans, but not the early human embryo, are properly considered "persons."
Thus, the interpretation of the person-based approach that I shall rely on in the present paper includes, but is not limited to, the following four principles [9]. Where p and q are persons and X and Y are possible worlds, or futures, that are accessible to, or alternatives for, agents at time t:
Basic person-affecting, or person-based, intuition. An alternative X is imper missible at t if and only if a person who exists (will exist) at t and at X is (will be) wronged at X. X is otherwise permissible.
Maximizing principle I. A person p is not wronged at X if it is not the case that there is a Y such that p exists at Y and p has more wellbeing at Y than at X.
Maximizing principle II. A person p is wronged at X if (i) p exists at X, (ii) there is a Y such that p has more wellbeing at Y than at X, (iii) there is no q who exists (will exist) at Y who has more (will have more) wellbeing at X than at Y, and (iv) for each q who exists (will exist) at Y, q exists at some time at X.
Never existent/never wronged principle. A person p is never wronged at X if p never exists at X.
The last three principles all provide sufficient but not necessary conditions. Of course agents do not necessarily wrong someone just by failing to maximize that person'
© Society for Applied Philosophy, 2003
This content downloaded from 216.165.95.161 on Tue, 03 Apr 2018 21:47:27 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 Can it Ever Be Better Never to Have Existed? 163
wellbeing; a complete statement of PBC would need to include principles that would address the tradeoff situations that frequently arise. But those principles will not be at issue in the present paper.
2. The Current State of the Nonidentity Debate
A. A Parfitian Case Pair
There exists one category of nonidentity cases with respect to which PBC implies that
a course of action deemed at least questionable by a number of theorists is, in point of fact, morally permissible. The question this part 2 addresses is whether cases that fall into that category count as counterexamples to PBC. I want to argue here that plausibly they do not [10].
This particular category is represented especially well by Parfit's "Two Medical Programmes" example. The following pair of cases is derived from that example.
"Don't need flaw to exist" case. A woman, Ms. Dontneed, has already con ceived a child. Ms. Dontneed knows in advance that if she does not begin taking medicine promptly for a certain minor but easily treatable condition the child she has conceived is significantly likely to be born with a particular disease. Though the disease is very serious and has life-long repercussions, the child's life will hardly be an anguished one and will indeed be unambiguously worth living. It does not matter to Ms. Dontneed or to anyone else, in any morally significant way, whether or not Ms. Dontneed begins the medication
or whether the child Ms. Dontneed produces will be afflicted with the disease
or not. Ms. Dontneed chooses not to take the medicine, and she gives birth to
a child, Dodie, who is in fact born with the disease [11].
"Need flaw to exist" case. A woman, Ms. Needflaw, is considering whether to have a child. Ms. Needflaw knows in advance that any child she conceives this month will have a significant risk of having a particular disease as a result of a minor but untreatable condition that Ms. Needflaw has. She also knows
that the same will not be true of any child she conceives next month since the minor condition Ms. Needflaw now has is self-limiting and sure to have run its course in a week or so. Though the disease is very serious and has life-long repercussions, the child's life will hardly be anguished and will indeed be
unambiguously worth living. It does not matter to Ms. Needflaw or to anyone else, in any morally significant way, whether Ms. Needflaw conceives a child this month or next month or whether Ms. Needflaw produces a child who is afflicted with the disease or a distinct child who is not. Ms. Needflaw chooses
not to delay conception, and she conceives and gives birth to a child, Nellie, who is in fact born with the disease [12],
For all practical purposes, Ms. Dontneed imposes a burden on Dodie that is perfec avoidable. Dodie Dontneed need not have been born with, and suffered her whole life
as a result of, the disease that Ms. Dontneed could have avoided imposing on Dodie
by simply taking her medicine. In contrast, Ms. Needflaw imposes a burden on Nellie
that is unavoidable if Nellie is to exist at all. To exist at all, Nellie must suffer the © Society for Applied Philosophy, 2003
This content downloaded from 216.165.95.161 on Tue, 03 Apr 2018 21:47:27 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 164 Melinda A. Roberts
disease, since the only way Ms. Needflaw could have avoided producing child would have been for Ms. Needflaw to have had some distinct ("nonidentical")
child in Nellie's place [13].
B. Person-Based Treatment of the Case
Whatever we think about the issue of whether never having existed at all can ever be better than existence, it is clear that in the case of Dodie there existed for agents at the critical time two alternatives to that at which Dodie in fact finds herself — first, the alternative at which Dodie exists sans disease and, second, the alternative at which
Dodie never exists at all. In virtue of the former, it is plain that there existed for agents at the critical time an alternative that was better for Dodie — an alternative, that is, in which Dodie has more wellbeing than she in fact has.
In contrast, in the case of Nellie there existed only one alternative to that at which Nellie finds herself — the alternative of never having existed at all. Now we know that existence sans disease cannot be a better alternative for Nellie since it is not an altern
ative for Nellie. But in order to apply PBC we need to know not just that much but, more generally, whether there existed any better alternative for Nellie. We must there fore determine whether the alternative of Nellie's never having existed at all would have been better for Nellie.
Whether it can ever be better never to have existed at all is, of course, the main topic of this present paper. Notably, however, with respect to this particular case, we do no need to have reached any decision regarding that issue in order to complete the person-based analysis. Let's divide the cases. If we think that never having existed at a is the better alternative in some cases for some persons, then we must determine
whether never have existed at all was in fact an alternative that was better for Nellie.
Suppose, then, that we do think that never having existed at all is in some cases for
some persons the better alternative. Would never having existed at all have been better
for Nellie?
However we ultimately decide to weigh the alternative of never existing at all
against the alternative of a flawed existence, it is plausible that the answer to this question will easily be no. By hypothesis, Nellie's existence is merely flawed and not anguished; it is unambiguously worth having; the level of wellbeing, with adjust ments for the burdens that she suffers, that existence assigns to her will be clearly in the positive range [14]. In contrast, the level of wellbeing assigned to Nellie at
any alternative at which she never exists will surely be no wellbeing at all, that is, zero. Never existing at all would therefore not have been better for Nellie. Thus, if we do think that never having existed at all can sometimes be a better alternative, we are nonetheless in a position to conclude that, in the case of Nellie, there existed no better alternative than the flawed existence Nellie in fact has. Her actual situation is, thus, her best situation.
Now suppose that we do not think that never having existed at all can ever be a better alternative. If never existing at all cannot be a better alternative for anyone under any circumstances, then it cannot have been a better alternative for Nellie. But this means that, as before, Nellie's actual situation is her best situation.
The upshot is that, whether or not we think that never having existed at all can ever be a better alternative, there existed at the critical time no better alternative for Nellie
© Society for Applied Philosophy, 2003
This content downloaded from 216.165.95.161 on Tue, 03 Apr 2018 21:47:27 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 Can it Ever Be Better Never to Have Existed? 165
than her own existence. In contrast, as we have said, in the case of Dodie, there was a better alternative, existence sans disease.
These facts are critical to PBC's assessment of the case. Since Ms. Dontneed could
have taken her medicine and produced a healthy Dodie, there existed an alternati
which, first, Dodie has more wellbeing than she in fact has and, second, no one given the facts of the case — has any less. But not so for Nellie, whose wellbeing been maximized. On these facts, PBC's maximizing principles imply that Dodie is
wronged and that Nellie is not [15]. But PBC also contains the basic person-affecting,
or person-based, intuition, to the effect that whether a given alternative is permissible depends on whether any person at that alternative has been wronged [16]. Thus, the alternative at which Dodie exists and suffers is impermissible. But not so for the alternative at which Nellie exists and suffers.
(c) Aggregative, Impersonal Treatment of the Case
According to PBC, the alternatives chosen by Ms. Needflaw and Ms. Dontneed have distinct normative statuses. According to AC, just the opposite is true. For AC, the
issue of whether there exists an alternative at the critical time that is better for the person who we think may have been wronged has no significance. Rather, for AC, the critical issue is whether there exists an alternative that contains more aggregate wellbeing. In this connection, what is relevant is that Ms. Dontneed could have taken her medicine
and produced a healthy Dodie, and Ms. Needflaw could have delayed conception for
a month and produced a healthy child distinct from ("nonidentical" to) Nellie.
In both cases, in other words, there exists an alternative that contains more aggreg ate wellbeing than the alternative in fact chosen. AC thus implies in each case that the alternative in fact chosen is impermissible.
(d) The Case as Counterexample to PBC?
The discussion up to now shows only that there is a distinction in how AC and PBC analyze the cases of Dodie and Nellie. A further question is whether the example also gives us a basis on which to reject one of the two normative approaches.
Parfit suggests that it might. Surely we all agree that what Ms. Dontneed has done is wrong [17]. But what Ms. Needflaw has done appears to Parfit to be just as bad — despite the fact that, in contrast to Ms. Dontneed, the only way that Ms. Needflaw could have avoided producing a diseased child would have been to produce a child distinct from — or "nonidentical" to — Nellie. But if what Ms. Dontneed has done is wrong, then what Ms. Needflaw has done is surely wrong as well.
This thinking leads Parfit to the conclusion that the two choices should be con sidered normatively on par and that there is "no difference" between them. "I know of some people who do not accept this claim," writes Parfit, "but know of more who do" [18], Thus Parfit "predict[s] that Theory X will not take a person-affecting form" [19],
According to PBC, of course, the two choices are not on par, and there does exist a significant normative distinction between them. One choice is morally permissible and one is not. However, despite Parfit's endorsement of the "no difference" view, he notably does not conclude that PBC has been demonstrated false, or that it has been
© Society for Applied Philosophy, 2003
This content downloaded from 216.165.95.161 on Tue, 03 Apr 2018 21:47:27 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 166 Melinda A. Roberts
effectively counterexampled [20]. Parfit is not, I think, at this juncture simply b His reasons for hedging his bets are quite sound. For he is uniquely position lying in wait in the subsequent sections of his important treatise the proble created for AC by the so-called "repugnant conclusion" [21]. Sensible, certainly, not
to declare the demise of one strategy when one knows full well that the primary competing strategy might itself at the end of the day turn out to have a fatal defect. My own view is that intuition is just not sufficiently clear to justify the conclusion
that there is, in fact, no significant normative difference between the two choices. Indeed, it seems to me that it is at least as likely that there does exist a rather important normative difference. After all, by hypothesis Nellie could not have existed and not had the disease, and her life, despite its flaws, remains one that is unambiguously worth living. In contrast, the injury, the harm, that Dodie suffers has been gratuitously imposed since Ms. Dontneed could have just as easily taken the medicine as not.
I do not mean to suggest that we should turn around and accept the case as a counterexample to AC. But that is where, in my opinion, we at the present time should let matters rest. Adventures in theory-making may eventually resolve the status of the case as counterexample to one approach or the other. At the very least, if we decide on other grounds that the person-based approach cannot be correct, or that the aggregative approach surely must be correct, then we will have good reason to consider PBC's treatment of the case as an instance of the deficiencies inherent in that person-based approach. But that hasn't happened yet. For now, as a provisional matter, we should take the view that the case serves to counterexample neither view. As a tool for the furtherance of a public, reasoned debate, the pair therefore should be used, at the present time, simply to illustrate the difference between the two views rather than to decide between them.
This "wait and see" strategy is not so different from the restrained approach that Parfit himself takes. Other theorists have been far bolder. Thus, Buchanan, Brock, Daniels and Wikler seem to regard an analogous Parfitian example as definitively establishing that the two choices are on par — and that both are wrong [22]. Cashing that point out in the practical terms of real life, the authors conclude that (i) a couple's choice to produce a child whose life will be or will be likely to be burdened by a serious genetic disease and (ii) a couple's choice of "child abuse and neglect" are likewise on par [23]. At best this startling conclusion seems premature [24],
3. A Revised Case
The case of Nellie, though not itself, I have argued, a counterexample t used as a template for the construction of a revised example that potentia PBC in a more effective way. Consider a case just like the original except to the identities of the children and the severity of those children's pligh moms are the same, and they retain the same abilities to create more their "children" (in an impersonal sense) by taking the medicine or by
ception. But the child Ms. Dontneed produces in the revised case, "Do the child Ms. Needflaw produces in the revised case, "Nora," we now stipu been born with diseases that make their lives not simply flawed but rathe Thus, unlike Dodie and Nellie, the children in the revised case possess littl
© Society for Applied Philosophy, 2003
This content downloaded from 216.165.95.161 on Tue, 03 Apr 2018 21:47:27 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 Can it Ever Be Better Never to Have Existed? 167
that which gives value to life, and they suffer every physical and emotional form of unremitting pain. If we suddenly ourselves were faced with such a future, we would unequivocally consider a quiet death to be better for us than a continued future.
Better, going forward, to accrue no additional wellbeing at all than to accrue a large quantity of negative wellbeing.
The aggregative theory treats the revised case precisely as it does the original. Since there exists in each case an alternative future that contains more aggregate wellbeing than the alternative in fact chosen by the agent, AC just as it did before endorses the "no difference" view. For the same reason that it is wrong, according to AC, for Dorothea to exist and suffer, it is also wrong for Nora to exist and suffer.
With respect to the original case, I argued that we were not compelled to take the "no difference" view. However, with respect to the revised case, that view seems clearly correct, and AC seems to get things exactly right. Indeed, the "no difference" view seems so clearly correct in this case that PBC cannot afford to reject that view. If PBC implies that what Ms. Needflaw has done is permissible — that it does not wrong Nora and that it is not wrong at all — then I think we will have to accept the revised case as a counterexample to PBC. At least, it seems to me — and, as it happens, to everyone I know — that with respect to the revised case the two women's choices are on par and that both are clearly wrong.
It is not so bad that PBC rejects AC's treatment of the original case. However, to retain any credibility going forward, PBC must have the flexibility to change course with respect to the revised case. PBC's treatment of the revised case is thus critical [25].
As part 4 below makes plain, we will have no reason to decide that PBC lacks the requisite flexibility unless we reject the idea that never having existed at all can be better than existence. So long as we are clear that never having existed at all can be better, there is ample reason to think that PBC will have the resources necessary to con clude that imposing the anguished existence on Nora wrongs Nora and is therefore impermissible.
4. A Person-Based Approach to the Revised Case
A. Appeal to Idea that Never Existing At All Can Be Better than Existence
Plausible normative theories must avoid the result, in the revised case, that either of the two agents' choices is permissible. PBC easily implies that Ms. Dontneed's choice in the revised case, just as it is in the original, is wrong. However, PBC can only conclude that Ms. Needflaw's choice is wrong by appealing to the idea that it can be better, for a person, that that person never have existed at all. According to PBC's maximizing principles, if there existed no alternative at the critical time that was better
for Nora, i.e., at which Nora had more wellbeing than she in fact has, then PBC is bound to the conclusion that what Ms. Needflaw has done does not wrong Nora [26] But the only alternative at which Nora arguably has more wellbeing is one at which she never exists to begin with. Thus, if that alternative is ruled out as one that is indeed better for Nora, then PBC has a problem.
Clearly, Ms. Needflaw had the alternative of never bringing Nora into existence at all. Part of the case is that Ms. Needflaw could have waited a month to conceive, at
© Society for Applied Philosophy, 2003
This content downloaded from 216.165.95.161 on Tue, 03 Apr 2018 21:47:27 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 168 Melinda A. Roberts
which time the condition that she has would have passed and any child sh have conceived would not have suffered the anguish that Nora in fact suffers. Ms.
Needflaw could have, in other words, avoided causing Nora to suffer anguish by
avoiding bringing Nora into existence to begin with. This much is incontrovertible.
The controversy lies rather in the truth of the idea of the bettemess of never existing at all for Nora, or BNB:
BNB. Any alternative at which Nora never exists at all would have been better for Nora than Nora's anguished existence in fact is.
I think BNB is intuitively plausible. But I also think we can provide some justification for BNB.
One part of the justification for BNB derives from the idea that never having existed at all is not in itself a chamber of horrors. Never having existed at all is not a state at which one accrues a high level of negative wellbeing but rather a state in which on accrues no wellbeing of any variety at all. In this sense, it is a neutral state, not a horrific one. This is not to say that never having existed at all consists of a state through which the nonexistent person simply drifts feeling neutral feelings. If one never exists at all, one never feels anything [27],
A second part of the justification for BNB derives from the fact that we think it is sensible to say about the revised case that a great deal of negative wellbeing, and very little positive wellbeing, in fact accrues to Nora, and therefore that her net level o wellbeing falls into the negative range. But what does that mean? Suppose that a neutral, or zero, level of wellbeing accrues, for example, to persons who — assuming they still technically continue to exist as persons at all — are permanently comatose, devoid of sensation, needs, dreams or desires and anything else that we think might give value to life. Part of the revised case is that Nora is much worse off than tha Plausibly, then, to say that Nora's level of wellbeing is in the negative range is just to say that her level of wellbeing falls below a zero level.
These two points are reflected in the following two claims that together, I argue, justify BNB.
PI. At any alternative at which Nora never exists at all, the level of wellbeing that Nora has at that alternative is zero.
And,
P2. The level of wellbeing that Nora in fact has is negative.
But if Nora has no — zero — wellbeing at any alternative at which she never exists a all, and if the level of wellbeing that Nora in fact has is less than that, then BN surely correct. Surely, for Nora, it would have been better never to have existed at a [28],
B. What is Wellbeing?
In favour of BNB, then, are PI and P2. But PI, in particular, may seem difficult to assess in the absence of at least a rudimentary account of what wellbeing consists of.
As I am conceiving it here, having a specific level of wellbeing — positive, negative or zero — is a matter of having certain properties and lacking others. The properties
© Society for Applied Philosophy, 2003
This content downloaded from 216.165.95.161 on Tue, 03 Apr 2018 21:47:27 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 Can it Ever Be Better Never to Have Existed? 169
that one has at a given alternative, on this view, "add up" in some way to one a specific level of wellbeing at that alternative.
On this conception, PI and P2 are true in virtue of the fact that at the alter specified Nora has certain properties and lacks others. More particularly, PI is virtue of the fact that, first, Nora does not have any properties at all at any al at which she does not exist and, second, that, where Nora has no properties at the properties that she does have — that empty set — add up to a zero le wellbeing [29]. Likewise, P2 is true in virtue of the fact that Nora as a matter has certain properties and lacks others. Thus, Nora has, for example, the prop being constantly anguished, a property that adds up, when taken together wit properties that Nora has, to a negative level of wellbeing.
BNB then — I want to claim — follows from PI and P2. It would have been better
for Nora not to have any wellbeing at all — to have zero wellbeing — than to hav negative level of wellbeing that she in fact has. It would have been for Nora, in o words, never to have existed at all than it is for Nora to exist. PBC thus implies t Nora is wronged and that the alternative at which she exists and suffers is theref impermissible.
This account of wellbeing in terms of properties is very rudimentary. I have no example, tried to say what properties one must have in order to have a specific le wellbeing [30]. But the rationale that I have just given for PI and P2 does not requ any more detailed account. Thus, whether we ultimately decide that the pert properties are necessarily "felt" or, alternatively, are the kinds of properties that w have (like money in the bank or good health) without knowing that we have them will nonetheless be the case that never existing at all strips us of all such propert with the result that all such properties that we do have — that is, none at all — a to no wellbeing.
C. A Nezv Repugnant Conclusion
What we ultimately say about BNB will clearly have important implications fo and, potentially, for the debate regarding whether a nonaggregative and person-b or an aggregative and impersonal, approach to normative theory is correct. W BNB, PBC will not have the resources to provide a plausible analysis of the r case involving the anguished Nora. I want to point out in this part just how dread things could get for PBC if we are indeed forced to reject BNB. Parfit's own " pugnant conclusion" argument is designed to bring to light an issue for AC — particular, the issue whether AC is forced to conclude that an alternative Z contai vast armies of persons each having a life just barely worth living is superior alternative A containing a much smaller number of persons each having a life worth living. Suppose that the aggregate wellbeing contained in Z exceeds tha tained in A. AC then implies that Z is better than A and, correspondingly, that Z morally obligatory choice but A is not [31].
As Parfit suggests, the conclusion that Z is the correct choice does seem "repugn [32], But at least at Z each of the vast armies of persons has a life that is, th
barely, worth living [33], But now consider Z*, just like Z except that each of the numbers of persons who exist has a life that is unambiguously not worth living, e barely — a life that is, indeed, anguished. And suppose that there exists no altern
© Society for Applied Philosophy, 2003
This content downloaded from 216.165.95.161 on Tue, 03 Apr 2018 21:47:27 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 170 Melinda A. Roberts
at which any person at Z* both exists and has more wellbeing than he or s For the persons at Z*, then, suffering is the only option if they are to ex is true that never having existed at all cannot ever be better than even anguished existence, then PBC's maximizing principles imply that no wronged at Z* and hence that Z* itself is a permissible choice [34].
So now we must imagine not vast armies of persons whose lives are just living but rather vast armies of persons whose lives are thoroughly, brutall If the one alternative is repugnant, the other is surely — well, beyond re PBC indeed implies that such an alternative is permissible, then we m PBC.
D. Legal Action for "Wrongful Life"
Our assessment of BNB will have implications, not just for PBC, but also for the le issue of wrongful life.
The term "wrongful life" describes a handful of medical malpractice cases that h badly tested the limits of the tort law system. The traditional legal theory behind claim of wrongful life is that some genetic diseases are not simply burdensom rather impose so much anguish on those who suffer from them that persons negligently fail to take the steps necessary to keep the victims of such diseases fr coming into existence to begin with must be held liable and pay damages for the h that those victims have suffered. Thus potential defendants in wrongful life actio include surgeons who perform ineffective tubal ligations, vasectomies or abortions
couples concerned about their own family history of serious genetic-based dis as well as the much broader range of medical personnel, including gynaecolog obstetricians and genetics counsellors who may fail to advise potential parents they are at risk of passing along such diseases to any offspring they might o produce.
While the plaintiffs in wrongful birth cases are the parents, the plaintiffs in wro life cases are the offspring themselves [35]. The wrongful birth claim is that the pa have been harmed by the defendant's failure to prevent them from having a child has a genetic disease or disorder when they might have had a healthy child instead contrast, the wrongful life claim is that the child has been harmed by having negligently brought into existence to begin with.
Courts in the United States have been quick to recognize the claim of wrong birth. Judges can see how the parents might have been harmed when a gen counsellor fails to advise them that they should undergo genetic testing before pr ing with conception, or when a doctor negligently performs an abortion — leadin the survival of the fetus and subsequent birth of the child — after amniocent confirms a serious genetic disease or disorder. Such parents in some cases would h been better off, financially and emotionally, had they had a healthy child instead
But most of the same courts have declined to recognize claims for wrongful life Thus, most courts have questioned whether the diseased child has in fact been har by a doctor's failure to take steps to avoid bringing that child into existence to be with. From the child's point of view, such negligence may seem more like fortuit accident than liability-inducing tort. Of course, there is an easy response to that If indeed the accident is fortuitous from the child's own point of view — if indee
© Society for Applied Philosophy, 2003
This content downloaded from 216.165.95.161 on Tue, 03 Apr 2018 21:47:27 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 Can it Ever Be Better Never to Have Existed? 171
existence, despite the disease, is from the child's own point of view a good rather than a bad thing — then there should be no finding of liability. The clearer — and much rarer — case for liability is the case where the existence itself is so anguished that it cannot plausibly be regarded a fortuitous accident from the child's point of view. However, even when confronted with that clearer set of facts, courts, on the basis of rationales that purport to be founded in logic and metaphysics but that can only be described as abbreviated, have been reluctant to recognize the child's claim as a legal cause of action. The stumbling block for them has consistently been the issue of harm to the child — an element essential to any claim of negligence brought by or on behalf of the child [37].
In effect, then, it is not just a few philosophers but many judges as well who have, for one reason or another, concluded that the idea that it is sometimes better never to have existed at all is problematic. A practical consequence of defending BNB and, by implication, PBC is thus to provide a cogent person-based account of how it can be that, in rare cases, a child's being brought into existence can harm that child — and not just his or her parents. In contrast to an aggregative account, a person-based account of harm would be just the kind of account that judges could live with in view of the pervasively person-based nature of the tort law system as that system is currently structured. Thus, the aggregative approach can easily generate the result that negligent conduct that leads to the truly anguished life is morally impermissible. That's a good thing. But the aggregative approach cannot generate the result that a given person has been harmed, or wronged. And if there is no victim, no plaintiff, no person who can make a plausible claim of having been harmed or wronged, then there is no basis for a claim of damages in tort. From the point of view of the tort law system as it exists today, the aggregative approach is thus an irrelevancy.
5. The Attribution Argument
A. Broome's Argument
What I will call the attribution argument derives from an argument presented by John Broome in a slightly different context. Broome's argument thus does not directly challenge the idea that never having existed at all can be better than existence but rather the idea that existence can sometimes be better for a person than never having existed at all. He writes:
If it were better for a person that she lives than that she should never have lived at all, then if she had never lived at all, that would have been worse
for her than if she had lived. But if she had never lived at all, there would
have been no her for it to be worse for, so it could not have been worse for
her [38].
Therefore, according to Broome, "it makes no sense" or, at least, "cannot ever be true" to say that "it is better for the person that she lives than that she should never have lived at all" [39].
The problem for BNB — and thus for PBC — is that if Broome's argument defeats the idea that existence can ever be better for a person than never having existed at all,
© Society for Applied Philosophy, 2003
This content downloaded from 216.165.95.161 on Tue, 03 Apr 2018 21:47:27 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 172 Melinda A. Roberts
then a straightforward adaptation of that argument should likewise defea never having existed at all in some cases would have been better for a
existence.
Rewriting Broome's argument as an argument against BNB, we thus obtain the
following.
If it were [worse] for a person that she lives than that she had never lived
at all, then if she had never lived at all, that would have been [better] for
her than if she had lived. But if she had never lived at all, there would have been no her for it to be [better] for, so it could not have been [better] for her. [Therefore,] it makes no sense [or, at least,] cannot ever be true that
it is better for a person that she [should never have lived at all] than that
[she lives].
But if never having existed cannot ever be better than existence, then BNB must be rejected.
B. The Question of Reference
According to the attribution argument, if a given person had never existed at all, "there would have been no her" for nonexistence to have been better for. What I
want to note here is that that statement, whatever else we make of it, should not
be understood to demonstrate a problem with reference. This point is critical in view of the fact that any such failure of reference would force us to reject statements like BNB — which itself contains multiple occurrences of the name "Nora" — on the grounds that they fail to express the kind of thing (i.e., a proposition) that can be either true or false.
That "Nora" is consistently secure in its reference throughout BNB may not be
completely obvious. Though Broome himself is best understood not to be raising an issue of reference — his focus seems rather to be on whether statements like BNB
"can" be true and, hence, on the issue of consistency — the situation with respect reference is nonetheless worth clarifying. At the very least, clarity on the is reference should facilitate the discussion of truth.
The concern about reference arises in its simplest form in connection with PI.
PI. At any alternative at which Nora never exists at all, the level of wellbeing that Nora has at that alternative is zero.
But — given the facts of the case presently under consideration, in particular that N in fact exists — PI may itself be understood as a counterfactual, that is, as PI*:
PI*. If Nora had never existed at all, then Nora's level of wellbeing would have been zero.
Many contemporary analyses of counterfactuals like PI* provide that their tru depends on the truth of the consequent at particular ("closest") alternatives, o worlds, at which the antecedent is true. Thus, if we reserve a to designate the actual world — at which Nora is stipulated to exist — and let (3 designate such a close world — any will do — at which Nora never exists at all, then the truth of PI* depends on the truth of the consequence, C, at p.
© Society for Applied Philosophy, 2003
This content downloaded from 216.165.95.161 on Tue, 03 Apr 2018 21:47:27 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 Can it Ever Be Better Never to Have Existed? 173 C. Nora's level of wellbeing is zero.
But for us to make the determination that C is true at P, S is going to have to make
sense to us — express, in other words, the kind of thing that we can evaluate as either
true or false at (3. This will in turn require that the subject term of C — "Nora" — refers.
It is at this juncture that a question about reference might arise. One might wonder, that is, how it is possible for the subject term "Nora" to refer in C when Nora does not exist at p.
In fact, however, I believe that one might wonder this only if one conflates C's
being true at p with C's being asserted at p. C is asserted at a — as part of PI* being asserted at a. And the reference of "Nora" in PI* asserted at a is well-established.
"Nora" used at a thus steadfastly refers just to Nora — a fact that is a give
revised case. That the claim that we make at a aims to say what things would b
for Nora at a world p at which Nora never exists does not change any of t effort does not untether the reference of the name "Nora" to the flesh and blood
Nora, who exists at a.
We can, of course, imagine PI* being asserted at p. And it does seem that a refer
ence problem plausibly arises in that case since it is hard to see how "Nora" in PI* asserted at P could manage to refer to our Nora, who is stipulated to exist at a but not at p. Anyone at P asserting PI* at P would have difficulty, on any standard theory of reference, making the necessary cross-world reference to the flesh-and-blood Nora who exists at a [40], But that is not our problem. Our problem, rather, is to make enough sense of C — and, correspondingly, PI* — asserted at a to determine whether C — and, correspondingly, PI* — is true, i.e., true at a.
Consider the counterfactual that, if George W. Bush had never existed at all, then George W. Bush would never have been president. Of course, someone could design a theory of reference according to which one or both occurrences of "George W. Bush" contained in this counterfactual fail to refer. Such a theory would essentially require us not to be able to see what it would take for the consequent of the counterfactual — that George W. Bush is not president — to be true at p. But it is not plausible that we do not see this. Surely, what it takes for the consequent to be true at p is just for George W. Bush not to have at P the property of being president. On the distinct issue of truth, one might take the position that the consequent is false in virtue of the fact that even the claim that George W. Bush does not have a given property at p implies that George Bush exists at p. Alternatively, one might (I would) take the position that the consequent is true in virtue of the fact that the property of being president does not attach to George W. Bush at p. But either way, tacit in the analysis is the common ground that "George W. Bush" successfully refers to our George W. Bush and that the claim is one we can understand and evaluate.
It would be a mistake to think that once-raging debates that sound something li the one at hand — whether, e.g., the statement that "The present King of Fra bald," made at a world at which there is no present King of France, is nonsense or Russell concluded) merely false — should give us any pause whether reference been achieved the context of PI*. Thus, by hypothesis Nora exists at the very with respect to which we want to know whether PI* is true. In contrast, the point of Russell's example was that there was no present King of France. It wa
© Society for Applied Philosophy, 2003
This content downloaded from 216.165.95.161 on Tue, 03 Apr 2018 21:47:27 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 174 Melinda A. Roberts
fact that presented an analytical challenge. In contrast, the analysis of PI* so far as any issue of reference is concerned, remains routine.
There is an independent point about reference that should be noted. Plau are possible persons who never do exist. That is, there exist possible futur at which there exist people who never will, in fact, exist (never will exist, t world). Thus plausibly we may engage in the enterprise of thinking that i some such possible persons that they never exist (existed) at all, and of th for other such possible persons that it would be (have been) better, for them to exist (have existed) rather than not. We may even think, applying PBC or some
other normative theory, that such persons would have been wronged had they been
brought into existence rather than not (though we cannot correctly think, at least
according to PBC, that such persons can ever be wronged by virtue of not having been
brought into existence [41]). I want simply to note that such thoughts — which are
expressed through ordinary applications of the existential quantifier — do not involve,
or require, that we have the wherewithal to refer to or denote any such possible person
as an individual by proper name or by definite description — in such a way as to derive the
result from PBC that, for example, that particular person would have been wronged had
he or she in fact existed. That latter enterprise — the referring to or denoting of persons
who never exist at all — may well, unlike the former, perfectly plausible, enterprise, be
doomed to fail [42].
But the failure of the latter enterprise does not pose a problem for PBC. While PBC does indeed consider critical whether persons have been wronged, PBC has no need to refer to such persons by name. The quantificational form of the judgement — that there exists a person p at an alternative X such that p is wronged at X — is all that is required for PBC to come immediately to the conclusion that X is impermissible. Of course, as a practical matter, we may want to apply PBC to cases involving specific individuals — for example, Nora. In such instances, our focus is on the singular form of the judgment — the judgment, e.g., whether the person Nora is in fact wronged or not. But as we have seen, there is no real issue whether we may successfully refer to Nora
— we can.
The analogous point may be made regarding future yet, but who will, exist. Agents thinking through how may affect future persons — in particular, whether su any such persons — do not need to be able to achieve re today. PBC is thus impersonal in that one sense: it is im
and be wronged at some future date. It is thus enough or another who will be wronged. That agents know in ad judgment is likely to be true if they do one thing b reason to choose the other [43],
C. The Attribution Argument
Let's take it, then, that claims such as BNB — that n have been better for Nora than her anguished existence any interesting issue of reference, and turn now to the
can ever be true.
The argument that they cannot is, again, as follows.
© Society for Applied Philosophy, 2003
This content downloaded from 216.165.95.161 on Tue, 03 Apr 2018 21:47:27 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 Can it Ever Be Better Never to Have Existed? 175
If it were [worse] for a person that she lives than that she had never lived at all, then if she had never lived at all, that would have been [better] for her than if she had lived. But if she had never lived at all, there would have been no her for it to be [better] for, so it could not have been [better] for her. [There fore,] it makes no sense [or, at least,] cannot ever be true that it is better for a person that she [should never have lived at all] than that [she lives].
This passage is susceptible to more than one reading. On the first, rather mechanical reading that we shall consider, the argument directly attacks BNB. On a second, more subtle reading, the argument attempts to pinpoint a problem with the inference from PI and P2 to BNB. Finally, on a third reading, the argument's focus is PI.
(i) The attribution argument as critique of BNB. In order for BNB to be true, it must be the case that, at any alternative X at which Nora never exists at all, Nora has a certain property, the property of it being better never to have existed at all than to exist. Let p be such a world, and call that property "B." Then, Nora never exists at all at (3, and Nora has the property B at [3. But if Nora never exists at [3, then Nora cannot have the property B at [3. Therefore, BNB is false.
We can quickly dispense with this first attribution argument. The problem is that it gives us no reason to think that BNB's truth requires Nora to have any property at all at those alternatives at which she does not exist. BNB plausibly does require Nora to have the property B — the property of it being better never to have existed at all than to exist. But where Nora needs to have that property if BNB is to be true is not at (3 but rather at the actual world, a, at which BNB is asserted and with respect to which we want to assess its truth. In point of fact, Nora's having the property B at (3 would not do much to make the claim BNB true in fact — which is to say, make the claim BNB true at a. Since Nora by hypothesis exists at a, there is, under the very metaphysics that the argument itself appears to presuppose, no reason to think that she cannot have the property B at a.
(ii) The attribution argument as critique of inference to BNB. The second attribu tion argument does not attack BNB directly but rather finds an inconsistency between PI, which states that Nora has zero wellbeing at any alternative at which she does not exist, and BNB [44]. Plausibly, BNB is true at a just in case Nora has the property
of it being better never to have existed at all at a. This means that BNB is true
at a just in case Nora has the property B at a. It is at this juncture that the
second attribution argument enters the fray. According to that argument, B must
also be a property that Nora has at [3. But we previously have said — in part 4.A above — that BNB is true at a in part because PI is true at a, and that PI
is true at a in virtue of the fact that Nora does not have any properties at [3 sin she does not exist at |3. But if Nora has B at (3, then Nora has some property at (3. And that is a contradiction. Thus, if we accept PI, we will not also want accept BNB.
Before we can find this argument persuasive, however, we must understand why it is that B must be a property that Nora has not just at a but at [3 as well. The second attribution argument does not itself address this question. Perhaps the explanation is something like this. The underlying rationale that suffices to insure that Nora has the property B at a also suffices to insure that Nora has the property B at (3 as well. In other words, if at a things are better for Nora at (3 than at a, then it must be the case
© Society for Applied Philosophy, 2003
This content downloaded from 216.165.95.161 on Tue, 03 Apr 2018 21:47:27 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 176 Melinda A. Roberts
at P that things are better for Nora at p than at a. But for that to be tru the case that Nora does after all have the property B at p.
But there is a problem with this line of thinking. For one thing, it leav why we are not free to take the view that, since Nora does not exist at p, that suffices to insure that she has B at a does not apply with respect
Nora at p.
Moreover, we do not seem bound to accept a universal rule according to which
properties like B that involve single-individual, cross-world comparisons must abide by a requirement of dual possession — must, that is, be had by the one individual at each of the two worlds under comparison. Consider, for example, the statement that Sadie has more money on deposit at the bank at a than she does at p. There is no obvious reason why we cannot say that Sadie can have the corresponding "more money" property — the property of having more money on deposit at the bank at a than at p — at a without also having it at p. If Sadie happens to exist at P, then, of course, she will also have the "more money" property at p. But perhaps the reason that she has so little money on deposit at the bank at P is that she does not exist at p. Then, it seems sensible to say that she has the "more money" property at a but not at p. Likewise, consider the statement that Martha endures more prosecutions at a than she does at p. Plausibly, if this statement is true, Martha must have at a the "enduring more prosecu
tions" property. If Martha exists at p, then her having the "enduring more prosecu tions" property at a will indeed imply that she has that property at P as well. But maybe the reason that Martha suffers fewer prosecutions at p is that she suffers no prosecutions at P, and maybe the reason she suffers no prosecutions at P is that she does not exist at p. In that case, it seems sensible to say that, while Martha has the "enduring more prosecutions" property at a, she does not have it p. Consider, finally, the statement that Dick has more existence in a than in p. Plausibly, if this statement is true at a, Dick must have the "exists more" property at a. But equally plausibly Dick does have that property — at a but not at p — if in fact Dick exists in a but not
P [45],
These three examples suggest that we are not bound to think that all single-individual,
cross-world comparisons must abide by the dual possession requirement. It at least appears that there are plenty of comparative, cross-world properties that need not be possessed by the individual who has them at both of the two worlds that are being compared.
The challenge, then, for the defender of the second attribution argument is to say why B must be understood to fall into the dual possession category — or, alternatively, to show that the dual possession requirement is, in fact, universal.
Admittedly, some comparative properties do, at a conversational level and perhaps in a more technical way, seem to obey the requirement of dual possession. Consider, for example, the statement that Jimmy at a has a better smile, or is taller than, or is a faster runner than, he has or is at p. For any of these comparisons to be accurate, plausibly Jimmy must have the comparative property at both a and p. For suppose that we insisted otherwise, and claimed that the comparisons are accurate, and that they are accurate because Jimmy does not exist at all at p. Our view would then be that to have any smile at a is to have a better smile than to have no smile at all at P; to have any height at a is to have more height than at p and to run at all is to run faster than one does at p and so on. But this view seems odd.
© Society for Applied Philosophy, 2003
This content downloaded from 216.165.95.161 on Tue, 03 Apr 2018 21:47:27 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 Can it Ever Be Better Never to Have Existed? 177
Plausibly, when we say that Jimmy at a has a better smile than he does at [ committing ourselves, at least at a conversational level, to comparing smile-pe properties that Jimmy in fact has — at a and at (3. We are comparing his goo a to his not-so-good, but not nonexistent, smile at (5. Plausibly, then, suc isons do require dual possession of the "better smile" property, the "taller than"
property, and so on.
But in other cases the comparisons do not seem to involve comparisons between
specific properties that individuals have in each of two alternative scenarios. Thus, for example, when we say that Sadie has more money on deposit at the bank at a than she has at p in the case where she does not exist at p, we are not comparing the properties that Sadie has at a and at P, respectively, of having $2,000,000 on deposit at a and having $0 on deposit at p. We are rather comparing two amounts — the amount of money Sadie in fact has on deposit at the bank and the amount of money Sadie has on deposit at the bank at p.
But if that is what we are doing, then there is no reason to think that a statement that correctly compares the two amounts requires that the person Sadie must have the "having more money" property at both a and p. Just the amounts have to exist, not the person. It may well be true that what we are really doing is comparing properties of those amounts. But that reality poses no problem at all in view of the fact that we have no reason to think that the amounts themselves do not exist at both a and P (and, indeed, at each other alternative as well).
Similarly, when we say that Nora has the property B, we should disclaim the idea that what we are doing is comparing a property that Nora has at a with a property that Nora has at p. Rather, what we are comparing is the amount of wellbeing that Nora's having certain properties and lacking certain others at a adds up to at a with the
amount of wellbeing that Nora's lacking all properties at P adds up to at p.
Under this analysis, it is perfectly plausible that the zero amount of wellbeing that Nora has at p is greater than the negative amount of wellbeing that Nora has at a even though Nora herself does not have any properties at all at p, including the property of things being better for Nora at a than they are at p.
My own conclusion, then, is that the second attribution argument does not demon strate that BNB cannot be true without Nora having the property B at those alternat ives at which she does not exist. Rather, that argument shows us something about how B conceived in a certain way might lead us to the dual possession requirement. But we have also seen that B conceived in another way does not lead to that requirement. To force the conclusion that B must be construed in the one way rather than the other — must, that is, be excluded from the category to which the "having more money" property belongs — we need a further argument. Perhaps it would be an argument having something to do with the nature of wellbeing — that is, that wellbeing is more like having a certain quality of smile than it is like having a certain amount of money on deposit at the bank. At the same time, a cursory review of the leading candidates for wellbeing — pleasure, happiness, preference-satisfaction, capability — all appear on the surface to be plausibly held at a zero level by any person who never exists at all. But this means that amounts, and not persons, can be the objects of our comparisons, and hence that the dual possession requirement would not be in order [46].
(iii) Attribution argument as critique of PI. The third version of the argument targets PI.
© Society for Applied Philosophy, 2003
This content downloaded from 216.165.95.161 on Tue, 03 Apr 2018 21:47:27 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 178 Melinda A. Roberts
PI. At any alternative at which Nora never exists at all, the level of we that Nora has at that alternative is zero.
As suggested in part 4.B above, we might find PI plausible because we think that, not existing at (3, Nora does not have any properties at (3 and that therefore the propert that she does have at [3 add up to a zero level of wellbeing.
The third attribution argument against PI is a simple one. It is that PI attributes a property, the property of having zero wellbeing, to Nora at an alternative |3 at which Nora does not exist. But if Nora at (3 has that property, then Nora must exist at (3. B she doesn't. PI must therefore be rejected as self-contradictory.
We should be skeptical about this objection starting out. We know, for example, tha not every predicate plausibly expresses a genuine property. Consider, for example where x is any set, the predicate "x such that x is not a member of x." Plausibly, no property at all, at least no genuine property, is expressed by that predicate.
Moreover, the rule that the third argument suggests seems to prove too much. Consider the assertion that, had George W. Bush never existed, George W. Bush
would never have been president. The third argument suggests that such an assertion involves the attribution of a property, the property of never having been president, to
the person, George W. Bush, at those worlds at which George W. Bush never exists at all. This view, in turn, requires that we dismiss the original counterfactual as self contradictory. But that counterfactual in fact seems not self-contradictory at all but rather plausibly to be true.
Suppose, then, that it is true that an individual cannot have a property at an altern ative unless that individual exists at that alternative. Suppose that "If George W. Bush had never existed, then George W. Bush would never have been president" is also true. Then, we should deny that the predicate, "never having been president," expresses a genuine property that is attributed to George W. Bush at an alternative at which he does not exist. We should say, instead, that the assertion does not affirmatively attribute any genuine property to George W. Bush at any such alternative at all but rather that
it simply denies that he has, at such an alternative, what we do clearly consider to be a genuine property — that of being president [47],
Likewise, when we say that Nora has zero wellbeing at (3, we should eschew the idea that we are attributing to her the property of having at [3 some level of wellbeing — a negative, positive or zero level of wellbeing. We are, rather, denying that she has at (3 any properties at all. Since Nora has no properties at |3 at all, all the properties — that empty set — that she does have at |3 add up a zero level of wellbeing.
Does it follow that we have attributed to Nora at (3 the property of having a zero level of wellbeing? No. We must, perhaps, acknowledge that the properties that Nora has at
P — that empty set — does itself have a certain property at (3, the property of adding up to zero wellbeing. But that fact does not provide any basis for the argument that we have attributed to Nora of the property of having zero wellbeing at (3 — particularly in view of the fact that the reason that things have added up to zero in her case is just that she never exists at |3 at all [48].
The three readings of the attribution argument that we have considered each use fully insists that we think carefully about how we need to understand BNB and the claims PI and P2 that support it. I have argued that BNB stands up to the attribution argument. Since Nora's existence is itself anguished, and since the level of wellbeing
© Society for Applied Philosophy, 2003
This content downloaded from 216.165.95.161 on Tue, 03 Apr 2018 21:47:27 UTC All use subject to http://about.jstor.org/terms

 Can it Ever Be Better Never to Have Existed? 179
that she in fact has falls below the zero level implied by nonexistence, we can after all say that it would have been better for Nora that she never existed at all. That compar ison in hand, and given the facts specified in the example, PBC's maximizing principles both avoid the result that Nora has not been wronged and include the result Nora has been wronged. The basic person-based intuition can then be invoked to obtain the result that the choice that brings Nora into existence is therefore wrong simpliciter, that is, impermissible [49].
6. Conclusion
If the arguments presented in this paper are correct, then PBC seems well-p to provide a theoretical framework for an account of the tort of wrongful PBC addresses the most serious of the objections that have been raised again ful life as a legally valid cause of action — the issue of whether the defenda can coherently be said to harm the new person. According to PBC, the bring existence of a person whose life is likely to be anguished is one that can coherently said to harm the victim, with the precise measure of harm cons difference between the zero level of wellbeing implied by nonexistence and
level likely to be suffered. There thus does not seem to be a sound basis for the rejection of wrongful life by courts as somehow incoherent on the question of harm. More generally, the attribution argument attempts to pinpoint a problem with the
nonaggregative, person-based approach that PBC describes. If PBC requires the view that agents have not wronged the anguished Nora, and therefore that they have done nothing wrong at all, then we probably all should become aggregationists. At least, we should acknowledge that the impersonal, aggregative approach, implying as it does that it is impermissible to bring Nora into existence, seems of the two views far more clearly on the path of the straight and narrow. However, as I have argued, I do not think that PBC does require that troubling result. The debate whether normative theory should take a nonaggregative and person-based form, or an aggregative and impersonal form, will therefore have to be decided on some distinct basis